Title: CERN accepts $1B in private cash towards Future Circular Collider
Author: zeristor
Score: 143 points
Link: https://physicsworld.com/a/cern-accepts-1bn-in-private-cash-towards-future-circular-collider/

Article Content:
--------------------
Mark Thomson takes the reins at the CERN particle-physics lab, which recently received $1bn in private donations for its next collider project, as Michael Banks reports
The CERN particle-physics lab near Geneva has received $1bn from private donors towards the construction of the Future Circular Collider (FCC). The cash marks the first time in the lab’s 72-year history that individuals and philanthropic foundations have agreed to support a major CERN project. If built, the FCC would be the successor to the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), where the Higgs boson was discovered.
CERN originally released a four-volume conceptual design report for the FCC in early 2019, with more detail included in a three-volume feasibility study that came out last year. It calls for a giant tunnel some 90.7 km in circumference – roughly three times as long as the LHC – that would be built about 200 m underground on average.
The FCC has been recommended as the preferred option for the next flagship collider at CERN in the ongoing process to update the European Strategy for Particle Physics, which will be passed over to the CERN Council in May 2026.If the plans are given the green light by CERN Council in 2028, construction on the FCC electron-positron machine, dubbed FCC-ee, would begin in 2030. It would start operations in 2047, a few years after the High Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) closes down, and run for about 15 years until the early 2060s.
The FCC-ee would focus on creating a million Higgs particles in total to allow physicists to study its properties with an accuracy an order of magnitude better that possible with the LHC. The FCC feasibility study then calls for a hadron machine, dubbed FCC-hh, to replace the FCC-ee in the existing 91 km tunnel. It would be a “discovery machine”, smashing together protons at high energy – about 85 TeV – with the aim of creating new particles. If built, the FCC-hh will begin operation in 2073 and run to the end of the century.
The funding model for the FCC-ee, which is expected to have a price tag of about $18bn, is still a work in progress. But it is estimated that at least two-thirds of the construction costs will come from CERN’s 24 member states with the rest needing to be found elsewhere. One option to plug that gap is private donations and in late December CERN received a significant boost from several organizations including the Breakthrough Prize Foundation, the Eric and Wendy Schmidt Fund for Strategic Innovation, and the entrepreneurs John Elkann and Xavier Niel. Together, they pledged a total of $1bn towards the FCC-ee.
Costas Fountas, president of the CERN Council, says CERN is “extremely grateful” for the interest. “This once again demonstrates CERN’s relevance and positive impact on society, and the strong interest in CERN’s future that exists well beyond our own particle physics community,” he notes.
Eric Schmidt, who founded Google, claims that he and Wendy Schmidt were “inspired by the ambition of this project and by what it could mean for the future of humanity”. The FCC, he believes, is an instrument that “could push the boundaries of human knowledge and deepen our understanding of the fundamental laws of the Universe” and could lead to technologies that could benefit society “in profound ways” from medicine to computing to sustainable energy.
The cash promised has been welcomed by outgoing CERN director-general Fabiola Gianotti. “It’s the first time in history that private donors wish to partner with CERN to build an extraordinary research instrument that will allow humanity to take major steps forward in our understanding of fundamental physics and the universe,” she said. “I am profoundly grateful to them for their generosity, vision, and unwavering commitment to knowledge and exploration.”
Further boost
The cash comes a few months after the Circular Electron–Positron Collider (CEPC) – a rival collider to the FCC-ee that also involves building a huge 100 km tunnel to study the Higgs in unprecedented detail – was not considered for inclusion in China’s next five-year plan, which runs from 2026 to 2030. There has been much discussion in China about whether the CEPC is the right project for the country, with the collider facing criticism from particle physicist and Nobel laureate Chen-Ning Yang, before he died last year.
Wang Yifang of the Institute of High Energy Physics (IHEP) in Beijing says they will submit the CEPC for consideration again in 2030 unless FCC is officially approved before then. But for particle theorist John Ellis from Kings College London, China’s decision to effectively put the CEPC on the back burner “certainly simplifies the FCC discussion”. “However, an opportunity for growing the world particle physics community has been lost, or at least deferred [by the decision],” Ellis told Physics World.
Ellis adds, however, that he would welcome China’s participation in the FCC. “Their accelerator and detector [technical design reviews] show that they could bring a lot to the table, if the political obstacles can be overcome,” he says. CERN releases plans for the ‘most extraordinary instrument ever built’
However, if the FCC-ee goes ahead China could perhaps make significant “in-kind” contributions rather like those that occur with the ITER experimental fusion reactor, which is currently being built in France. In this case, instead of cash payments, the countries provide components, equipment and other materials.
Those considerations and more will now fall to the British physicist Mark Thomson, who took over from Gianotti as CERN director-general on 1 January for a five-year term. As well as working on funding requirements for the FCC-ee, top of his in-tray will actually be shutting down the LHC in June to make way for further work on the HL-LHC, which involves installing powerful new superconducting magnets and improving the detection.
About 90% of the 27 km LHC accelerator will be affected by the upgrade with a major part being to replace the magnets in the final focus systems of the two large experiments, ATLAS and CMS. These magnets will take the incoming beams and then focus them down to less than 10 µm in cross section. The upgrade includes the installation of brand new state-of-the-art niobium-tin (Nb3Sn) superconducting focusing magnets.
The HL-LHC will probably not turn on until 2030, at which time Thomson’s term will nearly be over, but that doesn’t deter him from leading the world’s foremost particle-physics lab. “It’s an incredibly exciting project,” Thomson told the Guardian. “It’s more interesting than just sitting here with the machine hammering away.”

Comments:
--------------------
Thread 1:
I try to keep up with this stuff, but I wish to a layperson like me, the benefits of this was communicated more clearly. Even something like the JWT, I'm still not seeing the benefit. It's really awesome, don't deny that at all!
But I'd rather see more investment put into developing space-faring capabilities. Being able to transport lots of goods and people into space, and start manufacturing in space.
I've heard it said that research into this stuff will inevitably benefit all manners of other sciences, but hoping for a byproduct isn't the same as direct investment.
I'm just asking in earnest if priorities are aligned properly. I'm sure many of these experiments and projects would be more useful if they were actually built in space! Even for space agencies, it's all sorely disappointing. Their focus is on research and experimentation, which wouldn't be a problem if there were plans that were getting executed with some vision or goal of actual progress in capabilities. Their planning is also too long-term.
Why did artemis take 3 years? is it just to boast about being able to go back to the moon? By now this should have taken 3 months after over half a century. My point is not to be dismissive of the complexities, but to say that the state of things is being accepted as-is from what I'm seeing. Is there any actual solid plan to reduce at least launch times that factor?
It would be amazing if humans launched enough infrastructure into space, that there were would be foundries and factories entirely in space, reducing the dependence on transporting heavy things from earth into space.Spacecraft and space station components could largely be manufactured by mining raw materials and manufacturing with them without depending on earth's resources directly. That's probably not realistic, but what I'm decrying is not so much lack of action, but lack of vision (outside of scifi), planning, and focus.
That said, I'm just hijacking this to bring up that point of discuss. This is private cash, and I'm glad someone is donating to CERN for this research. I wish all the stuff I said could be funded with tax dollars. lay people need to see a vision, a plan, even if it can't be achieved in our lifetime, political will comes afterwards.
  Reply 1: I suppose the question of how to prioritize scientific funding is itself a scientific problem, so we would first need to decide how much to allocate to the scientific funding sub-discipline so that all of scientific funding is as efficient as possible!
In all seriousness, I don't know how science policy works but I expect it is more goal-oriented than objective-oriented. Science rarely starts with, "What are the biggest problems faced by humanity", and then tries to take them up. Rather what it's saying is, "I know this and this about something. Given this, I think I can figure out what is that", and then tries to figure out "that". There is no greater objective to figuring out "that", other than it is there to be found. You could perhaps say the ultimate objective of science is simply to know, and so you take whatever steps are in front of you that will help you know more.
It might seem kinda wasteful on the outset, but 400 years back nobody would have dreamed that studying why these dots in the night sky move will help understand tides on earth, which in turn leads to understanding tidal currents, which in turn leads to understanding climate at a given place. 200 years back no one would have imagined that the key to health and diseases lie in finding invisible things moving around in the air. A mere 100 years back it would've been impossible to conceive studying why tiny flecks of dust jiggle about when floating on a drop of water, would lead to unlocking immense reserves of energy for civilization. Everything we are today, everything we can do, all the scientific and technological progress we have achieved is a result of this very process. It happened simply because many thousands of curious minds tried to take the next step in front of them. If some of them didn't because they were told it wasn't a worthwhile investment of resources, where would we be today?

Thread 2:
As a non physicist I like the idea of a moun collider more - more compact (thus should be cheaper) as well as something which haven't done in similar energy scales and therefore more likely to need new technology in building it and finding something new.

Thread 3:
As someone who supports pure science research, I would be interested to understand if any of the discoveries of CERN (and related projects) in the last 50 years (say) have proved to have practical application.
(Specifically, "discoveries", not technology developed in support of the research)
  Reply 1: Before your edit:
The world wide web:

https://home.cern/science/computing/birth-web
certain medical imaging:
https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/medipix-partic...
grid computing advances:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S00104...
PIMMS:
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4724719/
Medicis:
https://home.cern/news/news/accelerators/cern-accelerates-me...
FLASH radiotherapy:
https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/cern-chuv-and-...
---
After your edit:
No, not yet, but those are long tail efforts. The technologies are the short term yield.
  Reply 2: It’s an interesting question. After all we were using electricity, batteries, electric motors, radios and telegraphs long before we ever discovered electrons and photons.
But discovering the electron was necessary for us to develop vacuum tubes. And developing quantum mechanics was necessary for developing transistors.
Think about the relative impact of the telegraph vs the vacuum tube.
When we do eventually find something to do with the W and Z bosons, it’s likely to look more like a transistor-level tech than an immediately practical tool like a lightbulb. But the second-order effects from whatever that new tech turns out to be, have the potential to be world-shattering.
  Reply 3: Quantum Mechanics, protons, electrons... That's the theory of everyday matter. You don't need very special situations to see their effects. Understanding the underlying equations enabled us to do more with what we already have.
High energy stuff only exists unstably for fractions of seconds. I find the idea that any of Standard Model physics, nevermind beyond standard model physics, could lead to a technological advance like the transistor extremely unconvincing.
Technological advance and scientific advance sometimes align. But there is no law that the former by necessity follows from the former. The expectation that they do is an extrapolation from a very brief period of human history.
  Reply 4: I don't know why you were getting down voted for this. Discovery during technological development of scientific instrumentation is one of the greatest returns on investment of funding pure science research. And like your sibling comment says, the pure science helps direct applied science, eg cutting edge materials science. Long tail, if for no other reason, because its a whole other development process that happens after the pure science.
  Reply 5: Fundamental research is entwined with practical applications, you can’t have the later without the former. Europe is known for FR, while everyone else seems to be better at commercialising. It’s alright, progress for us is progress for everyone.

Thread 4:
Maybe this one will finally make a black hole that ends it all
https://hasthelargehadroncolliderdestroyedtheworldyet.com/
  Reply 1: https://hasthelargehadroncollidercreatedablackholeyet.com/
 (Yep, of money)
  Reply 2: Or maybe just undo this weird timeline the last one put us in.
  Reply 3: source code has us at 89%

Thread 5:
it's already a black hole for funding
  Reply 1: Said the grumpy grandpa, shaking his hand at the cloudy sky.
I dont know what value that comment contributed, funding research is always a long shot. And often times it fails, but that is kinda its purpose, we dont know what we dont know.
  Reply 2: It's largely fans of Sabine Hossenfelder youtube channel, where some years ago sadly she shifted into just being a grifter selling conspiracy theories about the funding of particle physics.
The audience here tends to vastly overweight contrarian near conspiracy theory style stuff, so this sort of comment shows up on literally every damn post about physics research.
  Reply 3: Dont be too harsh on the first comment, I'm Sure he's a good guy.
Interesting to see that hossenfelder thing, I was'nt aware of it.
Her videos got recommended to me but title+thumb always felt like an over the top commentary with more drama than actual problem to be aware of.
So I never clicked and at some point youtube stopped.
  Reply 4: Yeah, it's sad she went that direction, because her educational videos that aren't agitpop are very good.
It's just another example of how the incentives on modern social media pull people towards ragebait and other forms of grift.
  Reply 5: You could use the same argument to justify spending $1B on searching for the Loch Ness Monster. The problem is, you can only spend money once. If you're spending $1B on the FCC you
aren't
 spending that same $1B on all kinds of other research.
With the LHC there was a very clear goal: verify the Standard Model and prove (or disprove) the existence of the Higgs boson - and hopefully discover some unexpected stuff along the way. On the other hand, the FCC is mainly a shot in the dark: they aren't validating a widely-accepted theory, they are just
hoping
 that if you spend enough money on a bigger collider something interesting will fall out.
Most research gives you at least
some
 insight. With the FCC there is a very real possibility that the insight will be "our $20B collider found absolutely nothing, now give us $1T to build an even bigger one". Sure, funding research is a long shot, but at a certain point you're just setting money on fire.
