Title: Euro firms must ditch Uncle Sam's clouds and go EU-native
Author: jamesblonde
Score: 732 points
Link: https://www.theregister.com/2026/01/30/euro_firms_must_ditch_us/

Article Content:
--------------------
Euro firms must ditch Uncle Sam's clouds and go EU-native
Just because you're paranoid about digital sovereignty doesn't mean they're not after you
Opinion I'm an eighth-generation American, and let me tell you, I wouldn't trust my data, secrets, or services to a US company these days for love or money. Under our current government, we're simply not trustworthy.
In the Trump‑redux era of 2026, European enterprises are finally taking data seriously, and that means packing up from Redmond-by-Seattle and moving their most sensitive workloads home. This isn't just compliance theater; it's a straight‑up national economic security play.
Open source's new mission: Rebuild a continent's tech stack
READ MOREEurope's digital sovereignty paranoia, long waved off as regulatory chatter, is now feeding directly into procurement decisions. Gartner told The Reg last year that IT spending in Europe is set to grow by 11 percent in 2026, hitting $1.4 trillion, with a big chunk rolling into "sovereign cloud" options and on‑prem/edge architectures.
The kicker? Fully 61 percent of European CIOs and tech leaders say they want to increase their use of local cloud providers. More than half say geopolitics will prevent them from leaning further on US‑based hyperscalers.
The American hypercloud vendors have figured this out. AWS recently made its European Sovereign Cloud available. This AWS cloud, Amazon claims, is "entirely located within the EU, and physically and logically separate from other AWS Regions." On top of that, EU residents will "independently operate it" and "be backed by strong technical controls, sovereign assurances, and legal protections designed to meet the needs of European governments and enterprises for sensitive data."
Many EU-based companies aren't pleased with this Euro-washing of American hypercloud services. The Cloud Infrastructure Service Providers in Europe (CISPE) trade association accuses the EU Cloud Sovereignty Framework of being set up to favor the incumbent (American) hypercloud providers.
They're not wrong.
You don't need a DEA warrant or a Justice Department subpoena to see the trend: Europe's 90‑plus‑percent dependency on US cloud infrastructure, as former European Commission advisor Cristina Caffarra put it, is a single‑shock‑event security nightmare waiting to rupture the EU's digital stability.
Seriously. What will you do if Washington decides to unplug you? Say Trump gets up on the wrong side of the bed and decides to invade Greenland. There goes NATO, and in all the saber-rattling leading up to the 10th Mountain Division being shipped to Nuuk, he orders American companies to cut their services to all EU countries and the UK.
- When AI 'builds a browser,' check the repo before believing the hype
- Just because Linus Torvalds vibe codes doesn't mean it's a good idea
- The most durable tech is boring, old, and everywhere
- What the Linux desktop really needs to challenge Windows
With the way things are going, they're not going to say no. I mean, CEOs Tim Cook of Apple, Eric Yuan of Zoom, Lisa Su of AMD, and – pay attention – Amazon's Andy Jassy all went obediently to watch a feature-length White House screening of Melania, the universally-loathed, 104‑minute Amazon‑produced documentary about First Lady Melania Trump.
Europe's cloud challenge: Building an Airbus for the digital age
READ MORESure, that's a silly example, but for American companies to do business today, they're kowtowing to Trump. Or, take a far more serious example, when Minnesota company CEOs called for "de-escalation" in the state, there was not one word about ICE or the government's role in the bloodshed. It was the corporate equivalent of the mealy-mouthed "thoughts and prayers" American right-wingers always say after a US school shooting.
Some companies have already figured out which way the wind is blowing. Airbus, the European aerospace titan, has put out a €50 million, decade‑long tender to migrate its mission‑critical applications to a "sovereign European cloud." Airbus wants its whole stack – data at rest, data in transit, logging, IAM, and security‑monitoring infrastructure – all rooted in EU law and overseen by EU operators. As Catherine Jestin, Airbus's executive vice president of digital, told The Register: "We want to ensure this information remains under European control."
Who can blame them? Thanks to the American CLOUD Act and related US surveillance statutes, US‑headquartered providers must hand over European data regardless of where the bytes sit. Exhibit A is that Microsoft has already conceded that it cannot guarantee data independence from US law enforcement. Airbus is betting that "data residency on paper" from AWS‑styled "EU sections" is not enough. Real sovereignty demands EU‑owned and run operations with full contractual and legal firewalls. Sure, your data may live in Frankfurt, but your fate still rests in Seattle, Redmond, or Mountain View if an American company owns your cloud provider.
Besides, do you really want some Trump apparatchik getting their hands on your data? I mean, this is a government where Madhu Gottumukkala, the acting director of the US Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, uploaded sensitive data into ChatGPT!
UK urged to unplug from US tech giants as digital sovereignty fears grow
READ MOREIn response, Brussels is pushing an open source‑led exit from hyperscaler lock‑in. Ministries are standardizing on Nextcloud‑style collaboration stacks instead of Microsoft 365 to fund Euro‑native clouds via the European Cloud Alliance. Some countries, like France, are already shoving Zoom, Teams, and other US videoconferencing platforms out the door in favor of a local service.
If you're running an EU‑based firm in 2026, the takeaway isn't that AWS‑in‑Frankfurt is evil; it's that for certain workloads, especially national security, industrial IP, or high‑profile consumer data franchises, EU‑native cloud and services are no longer a nice‑to‑have but a business continuity plan requirement.
It's time to get serious about digital sovereignty. The clock is ticking, and there's no telling when Trump will go off. ®

Comments:
--------------------
Thread 1:
> This isn't just compliance theater; it's a straight‑up national economic security play.
The woes of LLM contrasts…
In all seriousness, the points made ring true not only for European companies and should make everyone consider the implications of the current situation, as dreary as they are.
  Reply 1: Yeah, human brain is amazing. After I reading many AI replies, this kind style just stands out, even though I can't precisely describe it.
  Reply 2: It's not just big, it's large
  Reply 3: Russian and China are already getting rid of Microsoft.
  Reply 4: > Russian and China are already getting rid of Microsoft.
I don't know what you mean by China "getting rid of Microsoft" in the context of cloud providers. I mean, Azure is already present in China's internet, and just like any cloud provider present in China it's presence is a partnership with local cloud providers.
Russia is getting rid of Microsoft not because it has a choice. They are subjected to sanctions due to their invasion of Ukraine, and that essentially cut their access to all tech services. By that measuring stick, Russia is also  getting rid of Boeing and Airbus.
  Reply 5: The most interesting part is that they do not rely on Western software solutions (Russia still needs hardware, China may reach full autonomy soon enough). If they could do it relatively quickly, EU can do it too. And EU now has exactly the same incentives.

Thread 2:
Last week I migrated our db away from AWS RDS to a European cloud provider. Everything runs fine and we also have it cheaper!
One of our domains is due for renewal in a couple of months. I'm setting up the transfer to a EU registrar for it next week.
This all takes time and it's not the most important thing for the bottom line, but on the long run I'm sure I'll look back and say it was a great investment.
  Reply 1: > Last week I migrated our db away from AWS RDS to a European cloud provider. Everything runs fine and we also have it cheaper!
If I may ask, why didn't you choose the cheaper option before? What do you think you're trading off, if anything?
  Reply 2: Going with the default, we were already using other services from them.
  Reply 3: So you still have other stuff with AWS?
  Reply 4: I think they meant it the other way around. They mostly used AWS and had already some stuff on Hetzner, which made switching over to Hetzner easier.
  Reply 5: > to a EU registrar
Which one? I've been using DNSimple for so long, been trying to find something equally developer friendly who is based in Europe but haven't had much success. Used to use Gandi before DNSimple but it's obviously down the drain today.

Thread 3:
As a European, I am glad that this is finally discussed in the open! I have made multiple comments in the last weeks that one of the most important things, for me, is an alternative to the Visa/Mastercard duopoly. And yes, I can use an app to pay, but whenever I rent a car or purchase something online, I still use one of these two American companies. Why isn't the European Commission mandating these app payments in different EU countries to connect with each other? Wouldn't that go faster than the digital euro, that is set to come no earlier than 2029?
  Reply 1: It just plainly makes sense for central bank to offer a digital payments solution. Right now if I want to pay for something without 3rd party taking a cut is to mail the money in an envelope as if EU Central Bank denies existence of digital economy.
  Reply 2: they're working on it, but it'll take time:
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/euro/digital_euro/html/index.en.ht...
  Reply 3: Take a look here:

https://wero-wallet.eu/
  Reply 4: Looking forward having this in the country where I live and in the countries I mostly travel to! Well, actually all over EU.
What is unclear to me atm, is it possible to rent a car using wero? Also, can I pay online with it?
  Reply 5: Well, there is good news on that front [1]. It seems it's being planned.
[1]
https://thepaypers.com/payments/news/eu-considers-developing...

Thread 4:
I like it how everyone says that, but there is no european cloud operator able to offer what AWS/GCP/Azure offer. And if you are a start-up and you want to grow, the situation is even more dire.
And without a few hundreds of billions of EUR invested _today_ there will still be at least a decade until basic infrastructure will be somewhat on par with current day hyperscalers from the US.
And Office suite wise, it took Google about 15 years of pouring money into Google Docs to be almost as good as the MS offering.
Today, if for political reasons some EU companies will switch to whatever Europe has to offer in terms of cloud computing, they will need to spend a significant amount of money to retool their day to day pipelines and invest into developing or replacing cloud services with alternatives from the new provider or self-host if there is no native offering.
There’s a chance that the current situation will start to resolve itself in 3 years and we go back to normal, however that might look.
  Reply 1: What are Scaleway and OVH missing? Many of their products are even AWS compatible.
I hosted all our stuff in Europe at the last startup. The 2 providers above were much cheaper than our GCP stuff one the free credits ran out. It’ll have been the 4th place I’ve worked where Big Cloud wasn’t the default.
Other decent office suites exist, not to mention not all documents need to be cloud-based.
I find your statement lacks context, otherwise it doesn’t seem rooted in reality.
  Reply 2: I dislike the idea that if a cloud provider can not provide every service it's not even worth considering. Where is the problem solving. Maybe don't lock yourself into a single vendor and shop around for solutions. Apart from that the cloud offerings of companies like OVH and Scaleway are constantly expanding.
  Reply 3: This takes time and effort, thus, lost opportunity cost. The thing that makes these providers worth it, is that it lets the business focus on their core competencies and just add-on as they scale without worrying about complexity. A business owner who hyper-optimizes for every contract is unlikely to be focusing on growing their business, even if their business is more efficient on paper.
  Reply 4: Let’s say there’s a balance between the two, and maybe optimising a bit more is currently a good idea for various reasons…
  Reply 5: > This takes time and effort, thus, lost opportunity cost.
Why should we assume this for every type of business.
> The thing that makes these providers worth it, is that it lets the business focus on their core competencies and just add-on as they scale without worrying about complexity.
Since when? Mastering the complexity and implementation of infrastructure from US cloud providers is a skill that takes time in itself. Personally I don’t see how Scaleway does not provide the same for example.
At some point we have to question are we choosing AWS, GCP, or Azure out of brand name, convenience, and marketability. Our if they actually enable faster business execution, higher availability, security, and regional compliance that alternatives don’t…

Thread 5:
I kind of share the opinion of the FSF Europe that it is less important where software comes from compared to whether it’s libre, but for cloud hardware I really hope that we manage to create competitive European offerings. Maybe we’re lucky and this European initiative will produce more than five Fraunhofer institutes and a gift to SAP.
  Reply 1: I would say there’s even less chance nowadays to generate a fully private set of European alternatives to American cloud offerings.
Europes bureaucratization and the growth of the size of states has increased the last 10 years. I have less and less hope that we’re able to set the right free market conditions for real competition to happen.
That doesn’t mean that won’t be alternatives to American offerings, but most probably will come from somewhere else (Singapore, China, Taiwan…)
  Reply 2: > set the right free market conditions for real competition to happen
Just as a curiosity, what exactly are those "right free market conditions" and where have those been successfully implemented before? Because I think most of us (Europeans) are desperately trying to avoid replicating the American experiment, so if that's the "right free market conditions" I think we're trying to avoid those on purpose.
But maybe you're thinking of some other place, then I'm eager ears to hear what worked elsewhere :)
  Reply 3: If the size of state and bureaucratisation are the main issues, one wonders how China got so far :-)
  Reply 4: No one wonders that if they have any actual knowledge. Chinese government spending as a % of GDP is much less than say France. :-)
https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/exp@FPP/USA/FRA/JPN/...
Bureaucratisation in the realm of business is much smaller in most relevant ways for most enterprises in China as well.
  Reply 5: In what sense is china bureaucratic when it comes to business?
