Title: Berlin: Record harvest sparks mass giveaway of free potatoes
Author: novaRom
Score: 112 points
Link: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/jan/31/record-harvest-berlin-giveaway-potatoes

Article Content:
--------------------
Germans love their potatoes. They eat on average 63kg a person every year, according to official statistics.
But the exceptional glut of potatoes produced by farmers during the last harvest has overwhelmed even the hardiest of fans.
Named the Kartoffel-Flut (potato flood), after the highest yield in 25 years, the bumper crop has inspired one farmer to organise a potato dump on Berlin, with appeals going out around the German capital for people to come to various hotspots and pick them up for free.
Soup kitchens, homeless shelters, kindergartens, schools, churches and non-profit organisations are among those to have taken their fill. Even Berlin zoo has participated in the “rescue mission”, taking tonnes of potatoes that would otherwise have gone to landfill, or to produce biogas, to feed its animals. Two lorry loads have been sent to Ukraine.
Ordinary city residents, many feeling the squeeze over the rise in the cost of living, have arrived at pre-announced potato dump locations, filling up anything from sacks and buckets to handcarts.
Astrid Marz queued recently in Kaulsdorf, on the eastern edge of Berlin, one of 174 distribution points spontaneously set up around the city, to stuff an old rucksack with spuds. “I stopped counting at 150. I think I’ve got enough to keep me and my neighbours going until the end of the year,” she said.
The operation, called 4000 Tonnes after the surplus a single potato farmer near Leipzig offered in December after a sale fell through at the last minute, was organised by a Berlin newspaper with the Berlin-based eco-friendly not-for-profit search engine Ecosia.
“At first I thought it was some AI-generated fake news when I saw it on social media,” Marz, a teacher, said. “There were pictures of huge mountains of ‘earth apples’,” she recalled, using the word Erdäpfel, an affectionate term for the potato sometimes used by Berliners, “with the instruction to come and get them for free!”
The excitement has lifted spirits at a time when arctic cold has Berlin in its grip, hampering travel, grinding public transport to a halt and leaving pavements hazardously icy.
“There was a really party-like atmosphere,” said Ronald, describing how people cheerily helped one other with heavy loads and swapped culinary tips when he recently picked up potatoes for his family at the Tempelhofer Feld.
As a result of the buzz, the potato is receiving something of a new lease of life.
It has helped resurrect stories about how the humble tuber first became popular in Germany, after Prussia’s Frederick II issued an order for its cultivation in the 18th century, known as the Kartoffelbefehl (potato decree), establishing it as a staple food despite reported initial scepticism over its strange texture and form.
Recipes galore are being shared online as those who have scooped up the spuds try to work out what to do with the surfeit.
Although the potato has sometimes been spurned in recent years as some fitness gurus have recommended avoiding carbohydrates, experts have highlighted its nutritional properties, such as vitamin C and potassium.
Celebrity Berlin chef Marco Müller of the Rutz restaurant has said now is the ideal moment to give the potato the Michelin-star treatment. He uses an innovative technique to make a rich broth from roasted potato peelings and a sought-after potato vinaigrette.
Another of the recipes doing the rounds is Angela Merkel’s Kartoffelsuppe (potato soup), which the former German chancellor first shared with voters in the run-up to 2017’s general election in an interview with a celebrity magazine.
Her hot pot tip? To give it the necessary lumpy texture, she revealed: “I always pound the potatoes myself with a potato masher, rather than using a food mixer.”
Criticism has come from farmers in the region, who say the market in Berlin is even more saturated and their crop has been devalued further still by the vast giveaway.
More widely, environmental lobbyists have said the glut in part stems from a warped and out-of-control food industry, and that the mountains of potatoes pictured in storage facilities across the region is reminiscent of the notorious butter mountains and milk lakes of the 1970s, when farmers were overly incentivised to produce food owing to the European Economic Community’s guarantee to buy up surplus products at high prices.
While it’s the potato’s turn this year, last year hops were in surplus and next year, it is predicted, it will be milk.
A last hoorah for the intervention is expected in the coming days, and those keen to participate in the potato party are urged to keep a close eye on the organisers’ website for the next drops.
There are, in theory, about 3,200 tonnes (3,200,000kg or 7,056,000lbs) still up for grabs.

Comments:
--------------------
Thread 1:
Previously:
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=46618544
  Reply 1: Thanks! Macroexpanded:
4k tons of potatoes to be given away for free in Berlin
 -
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=46618544
 - Jan 2026 (141 comments)

Thread 2:
This is a massive missed opportunity for financialization. We need a 3x Leveraged Bull Potato ETF immediately. Tokenize the crop, lock it in a vault and trade futures against the harvest. Why feed people for free when we could create artificial scarcity and pump the price 10x by next week?
McDonald’s fries pricing suggests the market has already priced in a massive supply squeeze. They are generating better margins on a sliced potato than the Central Banks get when they print fiat.
  Reply 1: Crop futures are already a thing. Potatoes are traded on EEX for example:
https://www.eex.com/en/markets/agriculturals/potatoes
  Reply 2: Duh. Just set up a viral potato coin and then short it to death
  Reply 3: I know it's fashionable to blame capitalism on everything, but dealing with excess produce is legitimately a hard problem because they have a shelf life and someone has to harvest them and move them to where consumers are.
  Reply 4: Not to mention it's factored into future prices. Futures for the same commodity, but for delivery on different dates can vary wildly in price. The most notable examples are oil and electricity prices going negative occasionally.
  Reply 5: With advanced preservation techniques, we can extend the shelf life of food almost indefinitely. This flexibility extends to the farm level as well: farmers have the agility to pivot production annually, switching from low-demand crops like potatoes to more profitable alternatives as the market dictates.

Thread 3:
Fun facts from Germany:
- Fresh Aldi potatoes are like 0.5 Euro per 1 Kilogram - basically the same price as 25 years ago when Euro currency was introduced
- Our national TV channel now shows a great collection of "potato recipes" videos on demand on its main page
- Price of McDonalds/BurgerKing fries is around 4 Euro, and 5-6 Euro as a street food
- Crisps like Pringles are like 15 Euro per 1 Kilogram (a typical 2.50 Euro for 175gm pack)
  Reply 1: Small fries at McD had been lately around 2,99 EUR, that was very expensive given that the "small fries" are actually really small :-D
  Reply 2: They’ve been driving people to use their app for years now. The menu prices isn’t what one pays if they use the app, since it has a constant stream of coupons and discounts that bring the list price down.
  Reply 3: Pretty much a standard 20% off, sometimes 25% as a deal depending on amount spent. BOGO value menu McDouble / McChickens. Points that add up to actually free food. Items not on the menu in store. It's robbery if you don't use their app now.
  Reply 4: I’m not convinced it’s
that
 good because of how the deals are structured. For example, top deal where I am at the moment is 9 chicken nuggets plus two medium drinks plus two sauces for 1990 HUF. That’s a two person deal (you don’t need two drinks if you’re on your own), but there are no chips, add a large chips to share at 1270 HUF and your meal costs 3260 HUF. Two four nugget McMoment deals comes to 3060 HUF (small fries, small drink). Are an extra 80ml of coke and half a nugget each worth 200 HUF? Maybe? But it’s definitely not the huge savings it purports to be.
This walkthrough is just an example, open the app yourself and have a look, most of the deals are just an item or two away from being a thing people would actually order.
  Reply 5: In the US, a rule of thumb for restaurant economics is that only about 25-35% of an item's price is the cost of ingredients, when you average over all menu items (of course some items better margins than others). The rest goes into labor, fixed costs, etc. It varies a bit by region and by market segment (e.g. fast food vs fast casual vs fine dining), but not by too much.

Thread 4:
> “There were pictures of huge mountains of ‘earth apples’,” she recalled, using the word Erdäpfel, an affectionate term for the potato sometimes used by Berliners
Fun fact: the Hebrew translation of potato, תפוח אדמה, is the portmanteau of "earth" (אדמה) and "apple" (תפוח).
If you should ever be so fortunate as to have too many potatoes, see if you can shred them with a food processor and combine with onion, egg, salt, and pepper to make potato kugel, which freezes exceptionally well.
  Reply 1: The French term for potatoes is also ‘earth apple’: pomme de terre
  Reply 2: I'm fairly sure that is the origin of Erdäpfel. We certainly thought this was a funny name for potato when we learned French in Scotland :-)
When I learned German the word for potato was Kartoffel.
  Reply 3: Kartoffel is the standard German word.
Erdäpfel is used in many dialects and has plenty of variants.
Actually the various different words for potatoe and their distribution across Germany, Swiss and Austria is linguistically quite interesting (see this map [1]).
The legend is in German and roughly translates to (from top to bottom):
- Potatoes
- Ground pears
- Earth apples
- Earth pears
- Hearth apples
[1]:
http://stepbysteplingue.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/karto...
  Reply 4: I suppose this "earth apple" formulation coming up in several languages is partly because potatoes are from the New World, and Old World languages won't have a "traditional" word for them. Whereas in English it's basically a loanword.
  Reply 5: It also makes more sense when you realize that 1) pomme in older French meant fruit generally, not apples specifically, and 2) sweet potatoes were introduced to Europe well before white potatoes were.  So "earth fruit" seems fitting.

Thread 5:
Crops are a commodity where you can't instantly ramp up or down the supply to meet demand. Most require the better part of a year from seed to harvest. If it grows on trees, it can take years before they produce.
Forecasting crop output can also be tricky. Weather conditions, pests, or other things can lead to failed crops or bumper crops.
The life of a farmer can literally and figuratively be 'feast or famine'.
  Reply 1: My grandfather was a farmer in the 70s-80s, and he used futures on about 50% of his crop every year. Just enough to make sure a bad year can't wipe out the farm.
  Reply 2: This is why nations tend to have things like large stores of long lasting foods, and do things like crop insurance, so that they actually have farmers after a bad year to feed their people.
It is a very risky profession and unless you want to depend on other nations for your continued survival is absolutely needed.
  Reply 3: But how do they store and preserve that surplus for a longer time cheaply? Probably dehydration helps, but it adds some energy and storing costs.
  Reply 4: It's not always stored, sometimes it is spoiled.
https://www.thecooldown.com/outdoors/mississippi-delta-farme...
At one point more was sent to developing countries as aid but that practice was curbed as it was undercutting local farmers.
  Reply 5: I think most national reserves are cereals (wheat, rice) which are naturally long lasting.
There's some storage of special products (dairy, pork, famously maple syrup) but those have ad-hoc storage.
