Post ID: 46837346
Title: Nvidia's 10-year effort to make the Shield TV the most updated Android device
Author: qmr
Score: 195
Total Comments: 159
Created At (UTC): 2026-01-31T15:14:14+00:00
Domain: arstechnica.com
Link: https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2026/01/inside-nvidias-10-year-effort-to-make-the-shield-tv-the-most-updated-android-device-ever/

Article Content:
--------------------
It took Android devicemakers a very long time to commit to long-term update support. Samsung and Google have only recently decided to offer seven years of updates for their flagship Android devices, but a decade ago, you were lucky to get more than one or two updates on even the most expensive Android phones and tablets. How is it, then, that an Android-powered set-top box from 2015 is still going strong?
Nvidia released the first Shield Android TV in 2015, and according to the company’s senior VP of hardware engineering, Andrew Bell, supporting these devices has been a labor of love. And the team at Nvidia still loves the Shield. Bell assures us that Nvidia has never given up, even when it looked like support for the Shield was waning, and it doesn’t plan to stop any time soon.
The soul of Shield
Gaming has been central to Nvidia since its start, and that focus gave rise to the Shield. “Pretty much everybody who worked at Nvidia in the early days really wanted to make a game console,” said Bell, who has worked at the company for 25 years.
However, Nvidia didn’t have what it needed back then. Before gaming, crypto, and AI turned it into the multi-trillion-dollar powerhouse it is today, Nvidia had a startup mentality and the budget to match. When Shield devices began percolating in the company’s labs, it was seen as an important way to gain experience with “full-stack” systems and all the complications that arise when managing them.
“To build a game console was pretty complicated because, of course, you have to have a GPU, which we know how to make,” Bell explained. “But in addition to that, you need a CPU, an OS, games, and you need a UI.”

Comments:
--------------------
Thread 1:
> Nvidia released the first Shield Android TV in 2015
> it took about 18 months to [create] an entirely new security stack [...] Android updates aren’t actually that much work compared to DRM security, and some of its partners weren’t that keen on re-certifying older products.
> In February 2025, Nvidia released Shield Patch 9.2 [...] That was the Tegra X1 [security] bug finally being laid to rest on the 2015 and 2017 Shield boxes.
This is a real engineering marvel. Everybody else would have just  given up entirely long time ago. DRM bugs are in most case practically unrecoverable for products that shipped already (and physically in the hands of the adversary). The incentive to tell to consumers "Ditch that product you bought from us 2 years ago, and buy the more recent hardware revision or successor" is extremely strong.
This really feels like a platform that is maintained with pride and love by the nvidia engineering teams (regardless of one's opinion about DRM per se).
  Reply 1: Nvidia doesn't make money on hardware, they make money on ecosystems.
  Reply 2: They added auto-playing, full screen video ads to the home screen. I threw mine in the garbage.
Pride and love, lol…
  Reply 3: > They added auto-playing, full screen video ads to the home screen.
I'm pretty sure this is actually Google's fault (even Sony televisions suffer from this bullcrap). Unlike phone Android, Google TV (yes, that's the official name now) enforces certain "standards", one of them is this bullcrap.
  Reply 4: > I'm pretty sure this is actually Google's fault
Who cares who delivered the actual bytes or who initiated the change, the matter of fact is that people buy a device from one company, then the company is responsible for the experience they deliver while it's supported. Since they chose Android, they're responsible for the experience you get when using the stuff you buy from them.
I'd never complain to the maker of a compressor when it dies in a fridge, I'll complain to the one I bought the fridge from. Not sure why we're so adamant on thinking differently regarding computers. NVIDIA might blame Google internally, but feels like consumers are right to be pissed off about NVIDIA changing (or being OK with someone else changing) their experience in a product they bought from NVIDIA.
  Reply 5: My Sony TV doesn't do this, thankfully

Thread 2:
Everyone is missing the why here, this only happens because the whole stack is vertically integrated. Even if say LG wanted to make a box like this and update it for 10 years they couldn’t, they don’t make the chips. Qualcomm straight up refuses to support chips through this many Android releases. Even if device manufacturers want to support devices forever it won’t matter if the actual SoC platform drops support.
  Reply 1: While the vertical integration is definitely the best way to get it done, it's not strictly required as long as there is good enough documentation for a platform. Linux originally supported Intel without any Intel engineers even knowing it existed.
Also consider Apple's chips, which have gotten Linux support without Apple ever submitting a single line of code.
While Qualcomm's behaviour is definitely a massive bummer (not to mention Qualcomm's competitors), it doesn't stop manufacturers from supporting their devices. It merely stops maintaining support from being cheap and easy.
  Reply 2: Not only that, "vertical integration" is a red herring. If you had a "vertically integrated" device made entirely by Qualcomm and they stopped supporting it after 3 years then the vertical integration buys you nothing. The actual problem is that Qualcomm sucks.
  Reply 3: > Linux originally supported Intel without any Intel engineers even knowing it existed.
It should be noted that Intel makes CPUs, while Qualcomm makes SoCs, which include much more than just a CPU. Usually supporting the CPU is the easiest part, the rest is the issue.
That said, when device OEMs release the kernel sources, modders are able to update custom roms for a long time, so I doubt this is just a Qualcomm issue.
  Reply 4: They update the roms while keeping everything provided by Qualcomm the same
so basically the kernel is frozen even if the android version is updated
  Reply 5: I think it's more a combination of vertical integration and Nvidia actually wanting to provide support for so long. Apple, Google, and Samsung all make smartphones with their own chips, and yet none of them support running the newest OS on 10+ year old devices.

Thread 3:
I've got the OG model, and it's still the main device hooked up to my TV. All my TV streaming goes through it (mostly Jellyfin these days), and it can stream games no problem via Moonlight.
It's hooked up to a 4k LG TV, and I have no idea about how it does the upscaling, but 720p content looks perfectly fine on it.
Best (worst?) of all... it still gets updates.
  Reply 1: Yeah I just loved the one where they forced ads on the homescreen. Now I use ProjectIvy
  Reply 2: +1 for Projectivy.
After the ADHD-inducing default Android TV interface, Projectivy is just beautifully clean and simple.
I have quite a few Android TV (or are they called Google TV these days?) devices, and they all get the Projectivy makeover. The TCL TV running Android needs some 'adb' commands run so that
the users selection
 of launcher is maintained across reboots, bit other than that it's been smooth.
  Reply 3: The only two complaints about mine is the one set of updates about 5 years ago that killed every connection to my NAS, and that the auto skip function for credits doesn't know if there are scenes after the credits.
But overall, for running it for like 9 years with a cost of less than $200 and essentially zero maintenance, the shield is awesome.
  Reply 4: I thought the Shield's claim to fame was it was a certified 4K Android TV device because it could handle it early on?

Thread 4:
I have one of them, and been using it daily since I bought it in 2016. Bought a cheap Bluetooth remote control from AliExpress which was an upgrade over the Logitech Harmony crap I had earlier.
If it were to break, knock on wood it won't happen, what options are there? I have tried to look but haven't really found anything that is free of Chinese backdoors and has decent hardware. For just Plex or Jellyfin a N100 box or similar could do, but I want easy launch of HBO, YouTube etc. And I need that remote control option.
  Reply 1: From what I've seen in forums where people asked this, the answer is: nothing.
I only have two devices providing material to my media system: a Shield Pro and a Blu-Ray player. The Shield is the critical element, used daily for streaming and playing local media from a USB-connected SSD.
I hope Nvidia revises the Shield with up-to-date hardware and maintains its flexible nature. It's a pretty cool product. The biggest shortcomings I've encountered are the fault of moronic media companies. Great example: Spectrum (the cable company). These dolts have an Android application with which subscribers can watch content. But it doesn't run on Android TVs. It's called "Spectrum TV." It's so gallingly stupid that I hate rewarding them with money every month.
Oh, and I love how they addressed the goddamned Netflix button. If you so much as LOOK at the remote, Netflix launches in the middle of whatever you're watching. I actually removed the button from the remote entirely.
  Reply 2: Netflix button fix-
Get the app "button mapper" (or similar name)
On the free version, you can configure the button for-
one click of the netflix button to open Plex, and 2 clicks to open something else (eg youtube).
This also works when the shield and TV are off-
One click of the netflix button turns on the shield, which turns on the tv.
  Reply 3: Thanks. I should get around to just remapping it. I've had to replace my original remote, and the new one still has the Netflix button.
  Reply 4: The next best is probably an Apple TV 4k, but it can't direct play as many audio and video formats as the Shield.
  Reply 5: I use the Infuse app, and I haven't seen it fail with anything yet.

Thread 5:
The Steam Link, also from 2015, is also still receiving updates! My partner and I use ours regularly to play co-op games on our TV. I really appreciate the efforts of whomever is keeping it running.
  Reply 1: Steam Link is one of the greatest hardware releases of all time.
