Post ID: 46838417
Title: Finland looks to introduce Australia-style ban on social media
Author: Teever
Score: 683
Total Comments: 493
Created At (UTC): 2026-01-31T17:06:22+00:00
Domain: yle.fi
Link: https://yle.fi/a/74-20207494

Article Content:
--------------------
Lunch break at the Finnish International School of Tampere (FISTA) is a boisterous time.
The yard is filled with children — ranging from grades 1 to 9, or ages 6 to 16 — running around, shouting, playing football, shooting basketball hoops, doing what kids do.
And there's not a single screen in sight.
FISTA has taken advantage of the law change, brought in last August, which allows schools to restrict or completely ban the use of mobile phones during school hours. At FISTA, this means no phones at all unless specifically used for learning in the classroom.
"We've seen that cutting down on the possibilities for students to use their phones, during the breaks for instance, has spurred a lot of creativity," FISTA vice principal Antti Koivisto notes.
"They're more active, doing more physical things like playing games outdoors or taking part in the organised break activities or just socialising with each other."
With the smartphone restriction in schools widely considered to have been a success, Finland's government has now set its sights on social media platforms.
Prime Minister Petteri Orpo (NCP) said earlier this month that he supports banning the use of social media by children under the age of 15.
"I am deeply concerned about the lack of physical activity among children and young people, and the fact that it is increasing," Orpo said at the time.
And there is a growing groundswell of support for Finland introducing such a ban. Two-thirds of respondents to a survey published earlier this week said they back a ban on social media for under-15s. This is a near 10 percentage point jump compared to a similar survey carried out just last summer.
"Uncontrolled human experiment"
The concerns over social media, and in particular the effects on children, have been well-documented — but Finnish researcher Silja Kosola's recent description of the phenomenon as an "uncontrolled human experiment" has grabbed people's attention once again.
Kosola, an associate professor in adolescent medicine, has researched the impact of social media on young people, and tells Yle News that the consequences are not very well understood.
"We see a rise in self-harm and especially eating disorders. We see a big separation in the values of young girls and boys, which is also a big problem in society," Kosola explains.
In the video below, Silja Kosola explains the detrimental effects that excessive use of social media can have on young people.
She further notes that certain aspects of Finnish culture — such as the independence and freedom granted to children from a young age — have unwittingly exacerbated the ill effects of social media use.
"We have given smartphones to younger people more than anywhere else in the world. Just a couple of years ago, about 95 percent of first graders had their own smartphone, and that hasn't happened anywhere else," she says.
All eyes on Australia
Since 10 December last year, children under the age of 16 in Australia have been banned from using social media platforms such as TikTok, Snapchat, Facebook, Instagram and YouTube.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese began drafting the legislation after he received a heartfelt letter from a grieving mother who lost her 12-year-old daughter to suicide.
Although Albanese has never revealed the details of the letter, he told public broadcaster ABC that it was "obvious social media had played a key role" in the young girl's death.
The legislation aims to shift the burden away from parents and children and onto the social media companies, who face fines of up to 49.5 million Australian dollars (29 million euros) if they consistently fail to keep kids off their platforms.
Clare Armstrong, ABC's chief digital political correspondent, told Yle News that the initial reaction to the roll-out has been some confusion but no little "relief".
"The government often talks about this law as being a tool to help parents and other institutions enforce and start conversations about tech and social media in ways that before, they couldn't," she says.
Although it is still early days, as the ban has only been in force for about six weeks, Armstrong adds that the early indicators have been good.
ABC journalist Clare Armstrong explains in the video below how children in Australia have been spending their time since the social media ban was introduced.
However, she adds a note of caution to any countries — such as Finland — looking to emulate the Australian model, noting that communication is key.
"Because you can write a very good law, but if the public doesn't understand it, and if it can't be enforced at that household level easily, then it's bound to fail," Armstrong says.
Playing to Finland's strengths
Seona Candy, an Australian living in Helsinki for over eight years, has been keenly following the events in her homeland since the social media ban came into effect in December.
She has heard anecdotally that if kids find themselves blocked from one platform, they just set up an account on another, "ones that maybe their parents don't even know exist".
"And this is then much, much harder, because those platforms don't have parental controls, so they don't have those things already designed into them that the more mainstream platforms do," Candy says.
Because of this issue, and others she has heard about, she warns against Finland introducing like-for-like legislation based around Australia's "reactive, knee-jerk" law change.
"I think the Finnish government should really invest in digital education, and digital literacy, and teach kids about digital safety. Finland is world-famous for education, and for media literacy. Play to your strengths, right?"
The All Points North podcast asked if Finland should introduce a similar ban on social media as in Australia. You can listen to the episode via this embedded player, on Yle Areena, via Apple, Spotify or wherever you get your podcasts.

Comments:
--------------------
Thread 1:
Modern social media is nothing like social media in early days (myspace, early Facebook and even early Instagram). Back then it was a platform to communicate with friends, and maybe even find new friends to meet up with.
Today social media is more like a drug, to keep the user engaged and to push content to them. The content must either be addictive/engaging or paid advertisements. Quality of the content doesn't matter at all. Connecting people to do stuff outside of the virtual world would actually hurt their business model. People turn off their devices and go outside, instead of watching ads.
So it's probably fine to just block the big platforms. Forums or messengers (without ads and public channels) are probably fine. Probably even Reddit - which does have an algorithm to show specific content - is not as bad.
  Reply 1: Reddit has been a cesspit of recycled pablum, populist image macros and low effort reply comments for more than a decade. Enthusiast subreddits are astroturfed to hell and back by people with a Shopify storefront and a dream trying to growth hack their way to a hockey stick. The low barrier to entry to each community means that this vapid culture eventually diffuses itself across subreddits that might otherwise be good. It's a postmodern toilet that flushes into its own tank.
I don't care if I sound old and salty when I say this: I miss phpBB and Invision forums. Even those are being bought up by marketing companies to sell ads and transformed with social media features... Xenforo (which everybody uses now) allows liking posts and supports Instagram-style content feeds.
  Reply 2: > I don't care if I sound old and salty when I say this: I miss phpBB
I'll one-up this: I miss USENET.
I never understood how anyone could like phpBB, compared to USENET news readers, it was a chaotic mess. But USENET, that was great for discussing things.
  Reply 3: Usenet before the Eternal September?
I remember using some forums, and there'd be pages and pages of idiots just replying "Wow, this is great, thanks OP!", or "Thanks from me too!". How the fuck do you think you're contributing rather than polluting?
And nowadays they can even create Github accounts and do this...
  Reply 4: I first got on the Internet in 1991.  The older students told me to lurk on Usenet and not post anything for a month or 2 to avoid getting flamed.  I did and then I loved it.  Once all the @aol.com people started showing up it went downhill.  By 2000 it was so full of spam and garbage that I stopped going.  I connected to a Usenet server last year for the first time in over 20 years and it was just full of junk.
  Reply 5: MAKE. MONEY. FAST ;-)

Thread 2:
I’d be open to a version of social media that is not banned and the version looks like this:
 - a straight linear feed with three tabs, 1) people close to me(default), 2) brands and influencers I choose follow and 3) everything else the algorithm wants me to see(this could be curated and not a linear feed)
My ex and I have an agreement in our separation agreement that our children can’t have social media until they’re 16. This is the version of it I’d want for them, if they choose(or feel pressured) to use it

Thread 3:
I get the instinct to ban it, but I’m not convinced the evidence supports treating “social media” as a single public-health toxin.
1) The best large-scale work I’ve seen finds the average association between overall screen/social-media use and teen well-being is tiny. That doesn’t mean “no one is harmed”; it means the “it’s wrecking a generation” story doesn’t fit the data very well.
2) “Social media” lumps together very different things:
   - messaging friends, hobby groups, learning communities, identity-affirming support
   - infinite-scroll algorithmic feeds + targeted ads + push notifications + autoplay
People in this thread are mostly describing the second category (“attention media”). If that’s the problem, regulate
that layer
.
3) Blanket bans are easy to route around and may push kids to smaller/shadier apps with weaker controls. If you want a lever that actually changes incentives, go after business model & design:
   - no targeted ads to minors
   - default chronological/subscription feeds for minors
   - disable autoplay/infinite scroll for minors by default
   - limits on notifications (especially at night)
   - transparency + researcher access to study effects
   - device/school-hour phone restrictions (where enforcement is actually feasible)
If you want to “end the experiment,” change the rules of the lab (platform incentives + design), not prohibit the existence of teens talking online.
  Reply 1: >  The best large-scale work I’ve seen finds the average association between overall screen/social-media use and teen well-being is tiny
Can you share the source? The last time I looked the association was both clear and pretty strong, e.g. "There was a linear dose–response association of TSSM and risk of depression. The risk of depression increased by 13% (OR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.09 to 1.17, p < 0.001) for each hour increase in social media use in adolescents." DOI:10.3390/ijerph19095164
> “Social media” lumps together very different things
HN does this, but the research is usually pretty clear in spelling out they mean FB, Insta, TikTok and so on.
> If you want a lever that actually changes incentives, go after business model & design
I too would like changes in that direction (mostly because adults are also affected negatively by social media), but keep in mind even a non-optimized, strictly chronological feed produces these negative effects, see keyword (and associated studies for) "upward social comparison", i.e. people are always more inclined to post about things that went well or are fun, and thus even a pure chronologically sorted feed produces a warped perception of normal social reality.
  Reply 2: The Australian 'social media' ban is only blocking specific platforms, so not really a social media ban. Lots of 'but what about' and 'kids will just' articles in the media, which didn't really address that forcing kids to move from a known toxic environment to a hopefully less toxic environment is at least a step in the right direction, even if not a silver bullet. There are certainly good reasons for kids to be on social media, but none of those reasons are valid when talking about Twitter. Youtube seems the hardest one to deal with, combining a great information resource with uncontrolled toxic comments and borderline illegal and harmful content.
  Reply 3: > 2) “Social media” lumps together very different things: - messaging friends, hobby groups, learning communities, identity-affirming support - infinite-scroll algorithmic feeds + targeted ads + push notifications + autoplay People in this thread are mostly describing the second category (“attention media”). If that’s the problem, regulate that layer.
I think you're not focussing on the "media" half of social media to differentiate some of that stuff.
> "messaging friends, hobby groups, learning communities, identity-affirming support"
Those things are all social but I don't see the media.
  Reply 4: Teens can still talk online. Social media is an obvious poison and we shouldn't give kids access to it.
  Reply 5: OP writes a thoughtful, evidence-based comment.
The mob responds with a 1-sentence emotional meme. Classic moral panic 101.
It's impossible to fight feelings with logic unfortunately, which is why many western countries are going to fall into this trap and ultimately kill the idea of digital privacy and the open web forever.
This particular moral panic is reaching peak trendiness, and the baptists and the bootleggers are out in full force. Both parties are begging for hamfisted over-reaction from government (the bootleggers and politicians for more nefarious reasons of course).

Thread 4:
I'm eternally grateful that the social media network that I was part of throughout my teenage years abruptly disappeared from the internet, never to come back again.
Some say it was a technical failure during migration when the company was trying to pivot to file hosting, but it's impossible to verify.
Perhaps these bans are a blessing in disguise and future generations will be happy to not have their most awkward stage of life available forever, to everyone, in detail.
  Reply 1: Are you referring to MySpace?
My highschool band had tracks and videos of live performances in the school hall on there that is forever lost and I'm still bitter about it.
  Reply 2: How is MySpace even comparable to today's social media? AFAIK MySpace wasn't agoritmycally driven to keep you addicted like TikTok or Instagram do. MySpace was just you and your friends from school competing on whose page is the tackiest.
  Reply 3: Yes, very different. A good example of we should not lump all platforms together.
  Reply 4: I am not referring to MySpace. It was a local-to-my-country social network which was outcompeted by another local-to-my-country social network, which in turn gave way to Facebook.
I was aware of the existence of MySpace at the time, but it never had mainstream adoption locally. We also had not one but two mainstream messaging apps and hardly anyone was using MSN.
Come to think of it, Facebook killed a lot of that homegrown tech.
  Reply 5: Early Facebook was inferior to local social networks in many ways. The real killer feature was convincing people to de-anonymize themselves on the internet.

Thread 5:
I'm fine with this, as long as they DO NOT require any form of ID or 'age' verification.
Instead this should be attacked from the profit side, by banning any form of advertising which might target children.  If there's no profit to be made in servicing said demographic and a law requesting at least end user 'agreement' that they are an adult, this should be sufficient.
  Reply 1: >  If there's no profit to be made in servicing said demographic and a law requesting at least end user 'agreement' that they are an adult, this should be sufficient.
Is it still advertising if an "influencer" takes money on the down low to sip a Pepsi not too obviously in the middle of a video?
Is it still advertising if an attractive and young person provides news that happens to be colored in a way that supports the narratives of a particular political faction?
Is it still advertising if you can't prove that a foreign power encouraged a popular yoga enthusiast or makeup artist to post some whispered ideas that weaken citizens' faith in your institutions?  Does that foreign power ever care about profit?
Advertising and propaganda love to explore the grey spaces around definitions, so your bans will end up being a whack-a-mole game.  Cutting off kids with an ID check is much easier.  Implementing age verification the Apple way would even protect privacy by simply registering whether Apple can attest that the user is over or under the age limit, without handing the ID over to third parties.
  Reply 2: There's no profit for the
platform
. As of now, both the "influencer" and platform are aligned in that they want children to consume more slop. If the platform doesn't have any incentive anymore, maybe most of those "influencers" will fall away, if the algorithm starts deprioritising content geared toward children. As you say, policing the "influencers" is difficult, but at least it is quite easy and simple to target the platform. Better than nothing.
  Reply 3: Who decides whether an ad is targeting children or not?
I’m not playing devil’s advocate, I’m curious what the SOTA is for ad moderation. I’m sure it’s relatively easy to tell a kid’s toy ad from adult ones like alcohol, but how do you differentiate toy ads targeting parents vs toy ads targeting kids?
  Reply 4: >Who decides whether an ad is targeting children or not?
Much simpler than that, you just ban all targeted ads full stop end of story. The ad-funded internet existed in the 90s before ad targeting was a thing.
You went on a car forum, you'd get ads about car parts. You went on a PC forum, you'd get ads about PC parts. Pretty simple stuff that didn't need to know your age, gender, political affiliation, ovulation status, etc so it's not like the web will go bust without ad targeting.
Targeted ads are exploitative and manipulative, and a crime against humanity, or at least on society.
  Reply 5: None of that attacks the motivation of FB to look the other way to kids clicking the "I'm an adult" button and pocketing money from advertisers buying un-targeted ads for snacks, clothes, makeup, computers/gaming, and a million other things that are equally as aimed at kids as they are at anyone else.
(Remember how many kids bought car magazines before they even had drivers' licenses? Advertising has never been "oh, ads for things adults will buy will be completely boring to children.")
